RULES  FOR  THE  PRADHAN  MANTRI  SURAKSHA  BIMA  YOJANA                         
(With effect from  1.6.2022) 

DETAILS OF THE SCHEME:  
PMSBY  is  an  Accident  Insurance  Scheme  offering  accidental  death  and  disability 
cover for death or disability on account of an accident. It would be a one-year cover, 
renewable from year to year. The scheme would be offered / administered  through 
Public Sector General Insurance Companies (PSGICs) and other General Insurance 
companies willing to offer the product on similar terms with necessary approvals and 
tie up with Banks / Post office for this purpose. Participating banks / Post office will 
be free to engage any such insurance company for implementing the scheme for their 
subscribers.  

Scope  of  coverage:  All  individual  bank/  Post  office  account  holders  in  the  age 
group of 18 to 70 years in participating banks/ Post office will be entitled to join. In 
case of multiple bank/ Post office accounts held by an individual in one or different 
banks/ Post office, the person would be eligible to join the scheme through one bank 
/  Post  office  account  only.  Aadhar  would  be  the  primary  KYC  for  the  bank/  Post 
office account.  

Enrolment  Modality  /  Period:  The  cover  shall  be  for  the  one-year  period 
stretching  from  1st  June  to  31st  May  for  which  option  to  join  /  pay  by  auto-debit 
from  the  designated  bank/  Post  office  account  on  the  prescribed  forms  will  be 
required to be given by 31st May of every year. Joining subsequently on payment of 
full annual premium would be possible. However, applicants may give an indefinite / 
longer option for enrolment / auto-debit, subject to continuation of the scheme with 
terms  as  may  be  revised  on  the  basis  of  past  experience.  Individuals  who  exit  the 
scheme  at  any  point  may  re-join  the  scheme  in  future  years  through  the  above 
modality.  New  entrants  into  the  eligible  category  from  year  to  year  or  currently 
eligible individuals who did not join earlier shall be able to join in future years while 
the scheme is continuing.  

Benefits: As per the following table:  

Table of Benefits 

a  Death 
b  Total and irrecoverable loss of both eyes or loss of use of  
both hands or feet or loss of sight of one eye and loss of  
use of hand or foot 

Sum Insured 
Rs. 2 Lakh 

Rs. 2 Lakh 

c  Total and irrecoverable loss of sight of one eye or loss of  

Rs. 1 Lakh 

use of one hand or foot 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 

Premium: Rs. 20/- per annum per member. The premium will be deducted from the 
account  holder’s  bank/  Post  office  account  through  ‘auto  debit’  facility  in  one 
instalment on or before 1 st June of each annual coverage period under the scheme. 
However,  in  cases  where  auto  debit  takes  place  after  1st  June,  the  cover  shall 
commence  from  the  date  of  auto  debit  of  premium  by  Bank/  Post  office.                                             
The premium would be reviewed based on annual claims experience.  

Eligibility Conditions: Individual bank/ Post office account holders of participating 
banks/  Post  office  aged  between  18  years  (completed)  and  70  years  (age  nearer 
birthday)  who  give  their  consent  to  join  /  enable  auto-debit,  as  per  the  above 
modality, will be enrolled into the scheme.  

Master  Policy  Holder:  Participating  Bank/  Post  office  will  be  the  Master  policy 
holder  on  behalf  of  the  participating  subscribers.  A  simple  and  subscriber  friendly 
administration & claim settlement process has been finalized by the respective general 
insurance company in consultation with the participating Banks.   

Termination of cover: The accident cover for the member shall terminate on any of 
the following events and no benefit will be payable there under:  

1) On attaining age 70 years (age nearest birthday).  

2) Closure of account with the Bank/ Post office or insufficiency of balance to keep 
the insurance in force.  

3)  In  case  a  member  is  covered  through  more  than  one  account  and  premium  is 
received by the Insurance Company inadvertently, insurance cover will be restricted 
to  one  bank/  Post  office  account  only  and  the  premium  paid  for  duplicate 
insurance(s) shall be liable to be forfeited.  

4)  If the insurance  cover  is ceased  due  to any  technical  reasons  such  as insufficient 
balance on due date or due to any administrative issues, the same can be reinstated on 
receipt of full annual premium, subject to conditions that may be laid down. During 
this period, the risk cover will be suspended and reinstatement of risk cover will be at 
the sole discretion of Insurance Company.  

5) Participating banks will deduct the premium amount in the same month when the 
auto debit option is given, preferably in May of every year, and remit the amount due 
to the Insurance Company in that month itself.  

Administration:  The  scheme,  subject  to  the  above,  will  be  administered  as per  the 
standard procedure stipulated by the Insurance Company. The data flow process and 
data proforma will be provided separately.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

It  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the  participating  bank/  Post  office  to  recover  the 
appropriate annual  premium from the account holders within  the prescribed period 
through ‘auto-debit’ process.   

Enrolment  form  /  Auto-debit  authorization  in  the  prescribed  proforma  shall  be 
obtained  and  retained  by  the  participating  bank/  Post  office.  In  case  of  claim,  the 
Insurance Company may seek submission of the same. Insurance Company reserves 
the right to call for these documents at any point of time.  

The  acknowledgement  slip  may  be  made  into  an  acknowledgement  slip-cum-
certificate of insurance.  

The  scheme  is  liable  to  be  discontinued  prior  to  commencement  of  a  new  future 
renewal date if circumstances so require. 

Appropriation of Premium:  

1)  Insurance  Premium  payable  to  Insurance  Company:  Rs.  20/-  per  annum  per 
member  

2)  Commission  payable  to  Business  Correspondents,  agents,  etc.    by  the  insurer: 
Re.1/- per member (for new enrolments only). 

3)  Administrative  expenses  payable  to  participating  Bank  by  insurer:  Re.1/-  per 
annum per member  

Note:  The amount  of  commission payable  to  Business  Correspondents,  agents,  etc.  
as  specified  in  item  2)  saved  in  case  of  voluntary  enrolment  by  an  accountholder 
through  electronic  means  shall  be  passed  on  as  a  benefit  to  the  subscriber  by 
correspondingly reducing the amount of the Insurance Premium payable specified in 
item 1).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
