REVISED  RULES  FOR  PRADHAN  MANTRI  JEEVAN  JYOTI  BIMA 
YOJANA (w.e.f.  1.6.2022)  

1. 
Details  of  the  scheme:    PMJJBY  is  an  insurance  scheme  offering  life 
insurance cover for death due to any reason. It is a one-year cover, renewable from 
year  to  year.  The  scheme  is  offered  /  administered  through  LIC  and  other  Life 
Insurance companies willing to offer the product on similar terms with necessary 
approvals  and  tie  ups  with  Banks  /  Post  office  for  this  purpose.  Participating 
banks/  Post  office  are  free  to  engage  any  such  life  insurance  company  for 
implementing the scheme for their subscribers.  

2. 
Scope of coverage: All individual account holders of participating banks/ 
Post  office  in  the  age  group  of  18  to  50  years  are  entitled  to  join.  In  case  of 
multiple  bank  /  Post  office  accounts  held  by  an  individual  in  one  or  different 
banks/  Post  office,  the  person  is  eligible  to  join  the  scheme  through  one  bank/ 
Post office account only. Aadhaar is the primary KYC for the bank / Post office 
account.  

3. 
Enrolment period: The cover shall be for one-year period stretching from 
1st  June  to  31st  May  for  which  option  to  join  /  pay  by  auto-debit  from  the 
designated individual bank  / Post office account on the prescribed forms will be 
required to be given by 31st May of every year. Delayed enrolment for prospective 
cover is possible with payment of pro-rata premium as described below; 

a)  For  enrolment  in  June,  July  and  August  –  Full  Annual  Premium  of 

Rs.436/- is payable. 

b)  For enrolment in September, October, and November – pro rata premium 

of Rs. 342/- is payable 

c)  For enrolment in December, January and February – pro rata premium of 

Rs. 228/- is payable. 

d)  For enrolment in March, April and May – pro rata premium of    Rs. 114/- 

is payable. 

Lien period of 30 days shall be applicable from the date of enrolment. 

4. 
Enrolment  Modality:  The  cover  shall  be  for  one-year  period  stretching 
from 1st June to 31st May for which option to join / pay by auto-debit from the 
designated individual bank / Post office account on the prescribed forms will be 
required to be given by 31st May of every year. Delayed enrolment for prospective 
cover is possible with payment of pro-rata premium as laid down in above para for 
which risk will start from the date of auto-debit of the premium.  

For  subscribers  enrolling  for  the  first  time  on  or  after  1st  June  2021,  insurance 
cover shall not be available for death (other than due to accident) occurring during 
the first 30 days from the date of enrolment into the scheme (lien period) and in 
case  of death (other  than due to accident) during lien period, no claim would be 
admissible. 

 Individuals  who  exit  the  scheme  at  any  point  may  re-join  the  scheme  in  future 
years.  The exclusion of insurance benefits during the lien period shall also apply to 
subscribers  who exit  the  scheme  during  or  after  the  first  year,  and  rejoin  on  any 
date on or after 01st June 2021.  

 
 
 

In  future  years,  new  entrants  into  the  eligible  category  or  currently  eligible 
individuals who did not join earlier or discontinued their subscription shall be able 
to join while the scheme is continuing subject to the 30 days lien period described 
above.  

5. 

Benefits: Rs.2 lakh is payable on member’s death due to any cause.  

6. 
Premium:  Rs.436/-  per  annum  per  member.  The  premium  will  be 
deducted  from  the  account  holder’s  bank  /  Post  office  account  through  ‘auto 
debit’ facility in one instalment, as per the option given, at the time of enrolment 
under the scheme. Delayed enrolment for prospective cover after 31st May will be 
possible  with  payment  of  pro-rata  premium  as  laid  down  in  para  3  above.  The 
premium would be reviewed based on annual claims experience.  

7. 

Eligibility Conditions:  

Individual  bank/  Post  office  account  holders  of  the  participating  banks/  Post 
office aged between 18 years (completed) and 50 years (age nearer birthday) who 
give  their  consent  to join  /  enable  auto-debit,  as per  the above  modality,  will  be 
enrolled into the scheme.   

8.  Master  Policy  Holder:  Participating  Banks/  Post  office  are  the  Master 
policy holders. A simple and subscriber friendly administration & claim settlement 
process  has  been  finalized  by  LIC  /  other  insurance  companies  in  consultation 
with the participating banks / Post office.   

9. 
Termination of assurance: The assurance on the life of the member shall 
terminate on any of the following events and no benefit will become payable there 
under: 

1)  On attaining age 55 years (age near birth day) subject to annual renewal up 
to that date (entry, however, will not be possible beyond the age of 50 years). 

 2)   Closure of account with the Bank/ Post office or insufficiency of balance 
to keep the insurance in force. 

 3)      In  case  a  member  is  covered  under  PMJJBY  with  LIC  of  India  /  other 
insurer through more than one account and premium is received by LIC / other 
company inadvertently, insurance cover will be restricted to Rs. 2 lakh and the 
premium paid for duplicate insurance(s) shall be liable to be forfeited.  

4)   If the insurance cover is ceased due to insufficient balance on due date or 
due  to  exit  from  the  scheme,  the  same  can  be  reinstated  on  receipt  of 
appropriate  premium  as  mentioned  in  Para  3  above,  subject  however  to  the 
cover being treated as fresh and the 30 days lien clause being applicable. 

 5) Participating Banks shall remit the premium to insurance companies in case 
of regular enrolment on or before 30th of June every year and in other cases in 
the same month when received.  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10. 
Administration: The scheme, subject to the above, is administered by the 
LIC  P&GS  Units  /  other  insurance  company  setups.  The  data  flow  process  and 
data proforma has been informed separately.  

It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  participating  bank/  Post  office  to  recover  the 
appropriate  premium  in  one  instalment,  as  per  the  option,  from  the  account 
holders on or before the due date through ‘auto-debit’ process.  

Enrolment  form /  Auto-debit  authorization /  Consent  cum Declaration  form in 
the prescribed proforma shall be obtained and retained by the participating bank/ 
Post  office.  In  case  of  claim,  LIC  /  insurance  company  may  seek  submission  of 
the same. LIC / Insurance Company reserve the right to call for these documents 
at any point of time.  

The  acknowledgement  slip  may  be  made  into  an  acknowledgement  slip-cum-
certificate of insurance.  

The scheme is liable to be discontinued prior to commencement of a new future 
renewal date if circumstances so require. 

11. 

 Appropriation of Premium: 

Full 
Annual 
Premium 
of 
Rs.436/- 
collected  

Rs.342/- 
collected  in 
the 
2nd 
quarter  of 
risk Period  

Rs.228/- 
collected     
in  the  3rd 
quarter  of 
risk period  

is 
Rs.114/- 
collected        
in  the  4th 
quarter  of 
risk period  

Rs.395/- 

Rs.309/- 

Rs.206/- 

Rs.103/- 

Rs.30/- 

Rs.22.50 

Rs.15/-   

Rs.7.50 

Appropriation 
Premium Where: 

of 

(1)  Insurance  Premium 
to  LIC/  Insurance 
Company 
(2)  Commission 

payable  to  Business 
Correspondents, 
agents,  etc. 
new 
only) 

(For 
enrolments 

(3)  Administrative 

Rs.11/-  

Rs.10.50 

Rs.7/- 

Rs.3.50 

Expenses  payable 
participating 
to 
Banks 

Note: The amount of commission payable to Business Correspondents, agents, etc.  
as specified in item (2) saved in case of voluntary enrolment by an accountholder 
through  electronic  means  shall  be  passed  on  as  a  benefit  to  the  subscriber  by 
correspondingly reducing the amount of the Insurance Premium payable specified 
above. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
