1.3  Objectives 

1.3.1  The objectives of scheme are to build capability of microenterprises to enable: 

i) 

ii) 

Increased  access  to  credit  by  existing  micro food  processing  entrepreneurs, 
FPOs, Self Help Groups and Co-operatives; 

Integration  with  organized  supply  chain  by  strengthening  branding  & 
marketing; 

iii)  Support for transition of existing 2,00,000 enterprises into formal framework; 

iv)  Increased  access  to  common  services  like  common  processing  facility, 

laboratories, storage, packaging, marketing and incubation services; 

v)  Strengthening  of  institutions,  research  and  training  in  the  food  processing 

sector; and 

vi)  Increased access for the enterprises, to professional and technical support. 

1.4  Outlay 

1.4.1  The scheme envisages an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore over a period of five years 
from 2020-21 to 2024-25. The expenditure under the scheme would to be shared 
in 60:40 ratio between Central and State Governments, in 90:10 ratio  with North 
Eastern and Himalayan States, 60:40 ratio with UTs with legislature and 100% by 
the Center for other UTs. 

1.5  Coverage 

1.5.1  Under the scheme, 2,00,000 micro food processing units will be directly assisted 
with  credit  linked  subsidy.  Adequate  supportive  common  infrastructure  and 
institutional architecture will be supported to accelerate growth of the sector. 

2.0  One District One Product 

2.1  The Scheme adopts One District One Product (ODOP) approach to reap the benefit 
of  scale  in  terms  of  procurement  of  inputs,  availing  common  services  and 
marketing of products. ODOP for the scheme will provide the framework for value 
chain  development and  alignment of  support  infrastructure.  There  may  be more 
than one cluster of ODOP product in one district. There may be cluster of ODOP 
product consisting of more than one adjacent district in a State. 

2.2  The States would identify the food product for a district, keeping in perspective the 
focus of the scheme on perishables. A baseline study would be carried out by the 
State Government. The ODOP product could be a perishable agri produce, cereal 
based product or a food product widely produced in a district and their allied sectors. 
Illustrative list of such products includes mango, potato,  litchi, 

5 

 
 
 

tomato,  tapioca,  kinnu,  bhujia,  petha,  papad,  pickle,  millet  based  products, 
fisheries, poultry, meat as well as animal feed among others. In addition, certain 
other traditional and innovative products including waste to wealth products could 
be  supported  under  the  Scheme.  For  example,  honey,  minor  forest  products  in 
tribal  areas,  traditional  Indian  herbal  edible  items  like  turmeric,  amla,  haldi,  etc. 
Support for agricultural produce would be for their processing along with efforts to 
reduce wastage, proper assaying and storage and marketing.  

2.3  With  respect  to  support  to  existing  individual  micro  units  for  capital  investment, 
preference would be given to those producing ODOP products. However, existing 
units  producing  other  products  would  also  be  supported.  In  case  of  capital 
investment by groups, predominately those involved in ODOP products would be 
supported. 

2.4  Support  to  groups  processing  other  products  in  such  districts  would  only  be  for 
those  already  processing  those  products  and  with  adequate  technical,  financial 
and entrepreneurial strength. 

2.5  New units, whether for individuals or groups would only be supported for ODOP 

products. 

2.6  Support  for  common  infrastructure  and  marketing  &  branding  would  only  be  for 
ODOP products. In case of support for marketing & branding at State or regional 
level, same products of districts not having that product as ODOP could also be 
included. 

2.7  Department of Commerce is focusing on agriculture crops on a cluster approach 
for  support  for  exports  under  the  Agriculture  Export  Policy  and  Ministry  of 
Agriculture is also focusing on cluster approach for development of specific agri- 
produce  in  districts  having  comparative  advantage.  A  number  of  states  have 
adopted similar cluster based development. The ODOP approach of the Scheme 
would lead to ease in providing common facilities and other support services. 

3.0  Programme Components 

3.1  The programme has four broad components addressing the needs of the sector: 

i)  Support to individual and groups of micro enterprises; 

ii)  Branding and Marketing support; 

iii)  Support for strengthening of institutions; 

iv)  Setting up robust project management framework. 
