3.2  Details of each of these components are described below. 

6 

 
 
 
 

4.0  Support to Individual Micro Enterprises 

4.1 

Individual  micro  food  processing  units  would  be  provided  credit-linked  capital 
subsidy @35% of the eligible project cost with a maximum ceiling of Rs.10.0 lakh 
per  unit.  Beneficiary  contribution  should  be minimum  of  10%  of  the  project  cost 
with balance being loan from Bank. 

4.2 

Eligibility criteria for individual micro enterprises under the scheme: 

i)  Existing micro food processing units in operations; 

ii)  Existing  units  should  be  those  identified  in  the  SLUP  for  ODOP 
products or by the Resource Person on physical verification. In case 
of units using electrical power, electricity bill would support it being in 
operations. For others units, existing operations, inventory, machines 
and sales would form the basis; 

iii)  The  enterprise  should  be  unincorporated  and  should  employ  less 

than 10 workers; 

iv)  The enterprise should preferably be involved in the product identified 
in  the  ODOP  of  the  district.  Other  micro  enterprises  could  also  be 
considered; 

v)  The applicant should have ownership right of the enterprise; 

vi)  Ownership status of enterprise could be proprietary / partnership firm; 

vii) The applicant should be above 18 years of age and should possess 

at least VIII standard pass educational qualification; 

viii)  Only  one  person  from  one  family  would  be  eligible  for  obtaining    
financial assistance. The “family” for this purpose would include self, 
spouse and children; 

ix)  Willingness to formalize and contribute10% of project cost and obtain 

Bank loan; 

x)  Cost of the land should not be included in the Project cost. Cost of 
the  ready  built  as  well  as  long  lease  or  rental  workshed  could  be 
included in the project cost. Lease rental of workshed to be included 
in the project cost should be for a maximum period of 3 years only. 

4.3  Selection Process for Individual Micro Units 

4.3.1  Identification of existing Units to be supported would be by a two-pronged process. 
Based  on  One  District  One  Product  approach,  support  would  preferably  be 
provided to the Units engaged in that product in the district. Other units, who have 
potential, would also be supported. 

7 

 
 
 

4.3.2  Applications  would  be  invited  at  the  district  level  on  an  ongoing  basis  for  Units, 
from those interested in availing the benefits under the Scheme. Resource Persons 
(RPs)  would  undertake  survey  of  various  clusters  and  identify  units  that  show 
potential for availing benefits under the Scheme. For applications received directly, 
RPs would undertake field verification and due diligence to assess their potential. 

4.3.3  All  the  potential  cases  based  on  identification  of  Units  directly  by  RPs  and 
application  received  would  be  submitted  before  the  District  Level  Committee. 
District  Level Committee  should  study  the  report  submitted  by  RP  for  each  Unit 
and interview the interested persons. 

4.3.4  Due diligence to be carried out by the RP for each Unit should have the following 

details: 

i)  Annual Turnover of the enterprise; 

ii)  Track Record of payments by the enterprise; 

iii)  Existing infrastructure; 

iv)  Backward and Forward Linkages; 

v)  Proximity to clusters; 

vi)  Marketing linkages of the enterprise. 

4.3.5  For  the  cases  recommended  by  the  District  Level  Committee/SNA,  RPs  should 
help them in preparation of DPR for availing bank loan for upgradation of the Unit. 
The DPR along with necessary documents should be submitted to the Banks for 
sanction of loan. 

4.4 

The  procedure  delineated  above  would  apply  for  selection  of  new  units  also, 
provided  the  ODOP  baseline  study  throws  up  a  need  /  potential  for  such  new 
investments. 

4.5  State  Governments  should  decide  at  what  level  they  would  want  to  finalize 
individual micro units list to be supported, by DLC or at SNA level. Similarly, for 
applications for capital investment by groups, common infrastructure & marketing 
& branding, the states should decide the role of DLC/SNA in routing of applications. 

5.0  Group Category 

5.1 

The Scheme would support clusters and groups such as FPOs/SHGs/ producer 
cooperatives along their entire value chain for sorting, grading, assaying, storage, 
common  processing,  packaging,  marketing,  processing  of  agri-produce,  and 
testing laboratories. 

5.2 

Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs)/Producer Cooperatives 

5.2.1  FPOs and Producer Cooperatives would be provided the following support: 

8 

 
 
 
 

i)  Grant @35% with credit linkage; 

ii)  Training support; 

iii) Maximum limit of grant in such cases would be as prescribed. 

5.2.2  Eligibility Criteria for Co-operatives/FPOs: 

i)  It should preferably be engaged in processing of ODOP produce; 

ii)  It should have minimum turnover of Rs.1 crore; 

iii)  The cost of the project proposed should not be larger than the present turnover; 

iv)  The members should have sufficient knowledge and experience in dealing with 

the product for a minimum period of 3 years. 

v)  The cooperative/FPO should have sufficient internal resources or sanction from 
the State Government to meet 10% of the project cost and margin money for 
working capital; 
