5.3  Self Help Groups (SHGs) 

5.3.1  A  number  of  SHGs  are  undertaking  food  processing  activities.  The  Scheme 

proposes to provide following support to SHGs:- 

5.3.2  Seed capital: 

i)  Seed capital @ Rs40,000/- per member of SHG for working capital and purchase 

of small tools would be provided under the scheme; 

ii)  Priority  would  be  given  for  SHGs  involved  in  ODOP  produce  in  giving  seed 

capital; 

iii) All  the  members  of  an  SHG  may  not  be  involved  in  the  food  processing. 

Therefore, seed capital would be provided at the federation level of SHGs; 

iv) This  would  be  given  as  grant  to  the  SHG  federation  by  SNA/  SRLM.  SHG 
federation would provide this amount as a loan to the members of SHGs to be 
repaid to the SHG. 

5.3.3  Support to individual SHG member as a single unit of food processing industry 

with credit linked grant @35% with maximum amount being Rs 10 lakh. 

5.3.4  Support for capital investment at federation of SHG level, with credit linked grant 

@35%. Maximum limit of grant in such cases would be as prescribed. 

5.3.5  Training & Handholding Support to SHGs: For support to SHGs, a large number 
of  trained  resource  persons  are  available  with  State  Rural  Livelihood  Missions 
(SRLMs). These local resource persons of SRLM having expertise in agro-produce 
would be utilized for training, upgradation of units, DPR preparation, handholding 
support, etc. 

5.3.6  Eligibility Criteria for Seed Capital for SHGs: 

9 

 

i)  Only SHG members that are presently engaged in food processing would be 

eligible; 

ii)  The SHG member has to commit to utilize this amount for working capital and 
purchase of small tools and give a commitment in this regard to the SHG and 
SHG federation; 

iii)  Before providing the seed capital, SHG Federation should collect the following 

basic details for each of the members: 

a)  Details of the product being processed; 

b)  Other activities undertaken; 

c)  Annual turnover; 

d)  Source of raw materials and marketing of produce. 

5.3.7  Eligibility Criteria for Credit Linked Grant for Capital Investment for SHGs: 

i)  The  SHGs  should  have  sufficient  own  funds for  meeting  10%  of  the  project 
cost  and  20%  margin  money  for  working  capital or  sanction  of  the  same  as 
grant from the State Government; 

ii)  The SHG members should have for a minimum period of 3 years’ experience 

in processing of the ODOP product. 

6.0 

Support for Common Infrastructure 

6.1  Support 

for  common 

infrastructure  would  be  provided 

to  FPOs,  SHGs, 
cooperatives,  any  Government  agency  or  private  enterprises.  Common 
infrastructure  created  under the  scheme  should  also  be  available  for  other  units 
and public to utilize on hiring basis for substantial part of the capacity. Eligibility of 
a project under this category would be decided based on benefit to farmers and 
industry  at  large,  viability  gap,  absence  of  private  investment,  criticality  to  value 
chain, etc. Credit linked grant would be available @ 35%. Maximum limit of grant 
in such cases would be as prescribed. 

6.2 

Types  of  Common  infrastructure  to  be  funded  under  the  scheme:  The 
following common infrastructure would be funded under the Scheme: 

i)  Premises for assaying of agriculture produce, sorting, grading, warehouse and 

cold storage at the farm-gate; 

ii)  Common processing facility for processing of ODOP produce; 

iii)  Incubation Centre should involve one or more product lines, which could be 
utilized by smaller units on a hire basis for processing of their produce. The 
Incubation Centre may partly be used for training purpose. It should be run on 
commercial basis. 

10 

 
 
 
 

6.3  Procedure  for  groups  to  send  proposals  for  Common  Infrastructure  and 

capital investment by FPOs/SHGs/Cooperatives: 

6.3.1  The  following  procedure  should  be  followed  for  seeking  funding  for  common 
infrastructure  and  capital  investment  by  FPOs/SHGs/Cooperatives  under  the 
Scheme: 

i)  A DPR for seeking assistance under the Scheme for capital investment and 
common infrastructure should be prepared, based on the format as prescribed; 

ii)  The DPR should have necessary details of the proposal, detailed project cost, 
proposed  manpower,  turnover,  marketing  channel,  sources  of  raw  material, 
estimated profit & loss account, cash flow statement, etc.; 

iii)  The DPR should be sent to State Nodal Agency (SNA). After approval of the 
proposal  by  SLAC,  SNA  should  recommend  the  proposal  to  MoFPI.  Any 
proposal for assistance to a group for grant above Rs.10 lakh should be sent 
to MOFPI for approval. 

iv)  After approval of the proposal by MoFPI, the proposal should be forwarded to 

the financial institution for sanction of loan; 

v)  The DPR may also contain proposal for training support to the group members 
based on the training hours & modules, as prescribed and the cost norms of 
Ministry  of  Skill  Development  and  Entrepreneurship.  Component  of  training 
and capacity building would be fully funded under the Scheme; 

vi)  Assistance  of  Rs.  50,000/-  per  case  would  be  provided  to  FPOs/SHGs/ 

Cooperatives for preparation of DPR; 

vii)  Disbursement of grant should take place to the bank account of the applicant 

organization after sanction of loan by the bank. 
