7.0  Branding and Marketing Support 

7.1  Marketing  and  branding  support  would  be  provided  to  groups  of  FPOs/SHGs/ 
Cooperatives or an SPV of micro food processing enterprises under the Scheme. 
Following  the  ODOP  approach,  marketing  &  branding  support  would  only  be 
provided for such product at the State or regional level. 

7.2  Eligible items for support 

i) 

ii) 

Training relating to marketing to be fully funded under the scheme; 

Developing  a 
standardization to participate in common packaging; 

common  brand  and  packaging 

including 

iii)  Marketing  tie  up  with  national  and  regional  retail  chains  and  state 

level institutions; 

11 

 
 
 
 

iv)  Quality control to ensure product quality meets required standards. 

7.3  Support  for  marketing  and  branding  requires  developing  a  common  brand, 
common  packaging  and  product  standardization.  The  appropriate  level  for 
common branding and packaging would differ from place to place, case to case 
and product to product. Whether it should be district, regional or state level would 
be  decided  by  the  concerned  SNA  in  each  case.  Therefore,  the  proposal  for 
support  to  marketing  and  branding  should  be  prepared  by  the  SNA.  Support  for 
branding and marketing would be limited to 50% of the total expenditure. Maximum 
limit of grant in such cases would be as prescribed. No support would be provided 
for opening retail outlets under the scheme. 

7.4  Vertical products at the national level could also be provided support for branding 
& marketing on the same lines as described above for ODOP focus. Such support 
for common branding/packaging and marketing would be provided at the national 
level. Proposal for that support should be sent to MoFPI by the states or national 
level institutions or organizations or partner institutions. 

7.5 

Eligibility criteria: 

7.5.1  The proposals should fulfill the following conditions:- 

i)  The proposal should relate to ODOP; 

ii)  Minimum turnover of product to be eligible for assistance should be Rs 5 

crore; 

iii)  The final product should be the one to be sold to the consumer in retail pack; 

iv)  Applicant should be an FPO/SHG/cooperative/ regional - State levels SPV to 

bring large number of producers together; 

v)  Product and producers should be scalable to larger levels; 

vi)  Management and entrepreneurship capability of promoting entity should be 

established in the proposal. 

7.6  Procedure for applying for assistance under Branding & Marketing 

7.6.1  Detailed Project Report preparation: 

i)  A DPR should be prepared for the proposal, comprising essential details of the 
project,  product,  strategy,  quality  control,  aggregation  of  produce,  common 
packaging  and  branding,  pricing  strategy,  promotional  details,  warehousing 
and storage, marketing channel, plans for increase in sales etc.; 

ii)  Support up to Rs.5 lakh would be available from SNA for preparing DPR for 

proposals for marketing & branding; 

iii) The proposal should also contain flow chart of activities from the procurement 
of  raw  material  to  marketing,  critical  control points,  ensuring  quality  control, 

12 

 

plans for five years in terms of promotional activities, increasing the number of 
participating producers and turnover; 

7.6.2  There  should  be  an  agreement  with  a  business  plan,  executed  between  the 
cooperatives/SHG/FPO/SPV, the lead buyer(s), if any, and the SNA, which would 
describe  the  capital  and  services  needs  of  the  producers  and  proposed 
improvements  that  would allow them  to  upgrade  their  production  capacities  and 
skills to strengthen their linkage with the market, i.e. the lead buyer(s). 

8.0  Capacity Building & Research 

8.1 

Support to National Institutions: 

8.1.1  Capacity building and training is a critical component in technical upgradation and 
formalization of micro food processing enterprises. At the National level, National 
Institute for Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) and 
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT) would play pivotal role in 
capacity  building  &  research.  They  would  be  eligible  for  financial  assistance 
towards  research  and  capacity  building.  NIFTEM  and  IIFPT  in  partnership  with 
State Level Technical Institutions would provide training and research support to 
the selected enterprises/groups/clusters. National level product specific institutions 
under  ICAR,  CSIR  or  premier  institutes  like  DFRL  and  CFTRI  will  be  partner 
institutions for providing support at the vertical level across the country for training 
and research. 

8.1.2  NIFTEM and IIFPT would carry out the following activities: 

i)  Capacity building and training for MoFPI, State and District officials; 

ii)  Developing  curricula  and  training  modules  and  partner  with  State  Level 
Technical Institutes for further trainings to micro enterprises and groups; 

iii)  Training of trainers; 

iv)  Development of online modules for training; 

v)  Preparation of standard Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for typical products 

for micro units; 

vi)  Development  of  shelf  of  technology/  machines  for  up-gradation  of  typical 

micro units; 

vii)  Partnership  with  other  research  and  training  institutions  for  the  above 

activities; 

viii) Strengthening State Level Technical Institutions for delivery of the Scheme 

requirements. 

8.1.3  NIFTEM  and  IIFPT  would  establish  a  PMU in  their organization  for  the  Scheme 
with composition as prescribed. For these PMUs, they would engage personnel on 

13 

 
 
 
 

contract basis. Grant under the Scheme would be provided to NIFTEM and IIFPT 
to meet full cost of these PMUs. 

8.1.4  NIFTEM  and  IIFPT  should  prepare  Project  Implementation  Plan  (PIP)for  the 
activities they propose to undertake along budget and submit to MoFPI. Committee 
for  Capacity  Building  &  Research  at  MoFPI  would  examine  the  PIPs  and  seek 
approval  of  IMEC  for  them.  MoFPI  would  provide  funding  support  under  the 
Scheme to NIFTEM and IIFPT for the activities approved in the PIPs. 

8.2 

Support to State Level technical Institutions 

8.2.1  State  Government  should  nominate  a  State  Level  Technical  Institution  for  the 

Scheme. Their activities would include: 

i)  Prepare PIP for the State Level Technical Institution; 

ii)  Providing  inputs  to  PIP  being  prepared  by  the  SNA  relating  to  capacity 

building and research; 

iii)  Conducting capacity building and training for State and District officials; 

iv)  Conducting training for District Resource Persons; 

v)  Provide inputs for Branding and Marketing plans being prepared by SNAs; 

vi)  Provide  mentoring  support  to  District  Resource  Persons  for  handholding 

micro enterprises, preparations of DPRs, etc. 

8.2.2  The  nominated  State  Level  Technical  Institution  should  prepare  PIP  including 
annual training calendar for the proposed activities and send  that to MoFPI after 
approval  from  the  State  Level  Approval  Committee  in  consultation  with  the 
NIFTEM and IIFPT. 

8.2.3  Criteria  for  selection  of  State  Level  Technical  Institution:  The  State  Level 
Technical Institution should be an existing institution involved in food processing 
technology. This Institute could be: 

i) 

ii) 

A college/institute under State Agriculture University or any other University; 

A State-owned food processing technology research Institute; 

iii)  An institute under CSIR or any Government of India institute focusing on food 

processing; 

iv) 

v) 

If it is a college, it should have undergraduate/post graduate courses in food 
processing technology and necessary faculty; 

The Institute should have a full-fledged laboratory with necessary testing and 
processing equipment; 

vi)  The  Institute  should  have  faculty  undertaking  research  work  and  product 
development and machinery for food processing, especially for MSMEs; 

14 

 

vii)  The proposal should be recommended by the State Government; 

viii)  The  Institute  should  be  willing  to  appoint  a  Nodal  Officer  and  a  dedicated 
team consisting of at least two faculty members focusing exclusively on the 
Scheme; 

ix)  The  Institute  should have  sufficient  built-up  space  to undertake training  for 

beneficiaries under the Scheme; 

x) 

The institute preferably should have pilot plants for processing few products 
under ODOP for the State. 

8.3 

Training support to individuals/groups 

8.3.1  Training support would be provided to individual units and groups that are being 
provided support for capital investment. In addition, training support would also be 
provided  to  other  existing  units  and  groups  in  the  districts  that  are  processing 
ODOP products. Groups that are being provided support for marketing & branding 
under the Scheme would also be provided training support. 
