8.3.2  Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE)have fixed per hour rate 
to  be  spent  on  trainings.  The  same  benchmark  rate  would  be  utilized  for  the 
Scheme.  Type  of  training  and  number  of  hours  of  training  should  follow  the 
prescribed norms. 

8.3.3  The following are the focus areas for capacity building under the Scheme: 

i)  Entrepreneurship  development,  essential  functions  of  enterprise  operations, 
marketing,  book  keeping, registration, FSSAI  standards,  Udyog  Aadhar,  GST 
Registration, general hygiene, etc.; 

ii)  Specific training designed for ODOP product or the product produced by the unit 
including  operations  of  necessary  machines,  hygiene  issues,  packaging, 
storage, procurement, new products development etc.; 

8.3.4  Mode of Training 

i)  Online modules would be used for the general training applicable to all Units; 

ii) 

Product specific training would be provided for the districts for ODOP using 
RSETI physical infrastructure to the extent possible; 

iii)  Training should be organized in short modules on a weekly basis using audio- 
visual  support  within  the  district  so  that  the  disturbance  to  the  existing 
business operations is least; 

iv)  An important component of the training would be work on the machines that 
Units  are  going  to  purchase  and  training  on  hygiene  and  packaging. 
Therefore,  a  specific  component  for  training  is  being  introduced  for  such 
beneficiaries in the existing units using those machines within the district or 
outside for a short duration. 

15 

 

8.3.5  Handholding  Support:  The  Scheme  envisages  engaging  Resources  Persons 
(RPs) at the district/ regional level for providing hand-holding support to the micro 
food processing enterprises. These RPs would carry out the following functions: 

i)  Handholding  micro  enterprises  in  preparation  of  DPRs,  getting  bank  loan, 
training,  upgradation  of  the  unit,  getting  necessary  regulatory  approvals, 
hygiene, etc.; 

ii)  Provide inputs for PIPs and ODOP and Cluster studies and study of groups; 

iii)  Identification and facilitation of applications for subsidies and seed capital to 

individual micro enterprises and groups and common facilities; 

9.0 

Institutional Architecture 

9.1  Robust institutional architecture at all administrative levels would be set up for the 
scheme. There would be committees at the National, State and District levels (for 
policy guidance) for implementation and to monitor the progress of the Scheme. 
These  committees  would  oversee  the  performance  of  the  National  Programme 
Division at MoFPI and the State Nodal Agencies. In addition to these, there would 
be PMUs set up comprising consultants and experts engaged on full time basis to 
support the National Programme Division at MoFPI and the State Nodal Agencies. 
Institutional structure is illustrated in the chart below and described in the section 
below: 

Figure 1: Institutional Architecture 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9.2  National Level Structures 

9.2.1  Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee: 

9.2.1.1  At  the  national  level,  there  would  an  Inter-Ministerial  Empowered  Committee 
(IMEC)  chaired  by  Minister  for  Food  Processing  Industries  with  the  following 
composition. 

Table 1: Composition of IMEC 

Composition 

1.  Hon’ble Minister of Food Processing Industries 
2.  Hon’ble Minister of State of Food Processing Industries 
3.  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Food  Processing 

Industries, 

Government of India (GoI) 

Designation 
Chairman 
Vice Chairman 
Member 

4.  Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Co-operation,  & 

Member 

Farmers’ Welfare, GoI 

5.  Secretary,  Department 

of 

Animal  Husbandry  and  Member 

Dairying, GoI 

6.  Secretary, Department 

of  Agriculture  Research  and  Member 

Education, GoI 

7.  Secretary, Department of Fisheries, GoI 

Member 

8.  Secretary, Department of Urban Development & Housing, 

Member 

GOI 

9.  Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, GoI 

Member 

10.  Secretary,  Ministry 
Entrepreneurship 

of  Skill  Development 

&  Member 

11.  Secretary, Ministry of MSME, GoI 

12.  Chairman, FSSAI 

13.  Chairman, NSDC 

14.  Representative of NABARD 
15.  AS&FA, Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
16.  Representative of NITI Aayog 
17.  Mission 

Director, 

(Officer 

the rank of
Additional/ Joint Secretary  and  above),  Ministry  of 

of 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 
Member 
Member 
Member Secretary 

Food  Processing Industries. 

9.2.1.2  MoFPI  may  nominate  any  other  member  to  IMEC,  PEC  and  Committee  on 
Capacity Building & Research. The IMEC would meet at least once in a quarter 
and  would  be  the  policy  making  body  giving  overall  direction  and  guidance  for 
implementation  of  the  scheme  and  would  monitor  and  review  its  progress  and 
performance. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 

9.2.1.3  Functions of IMEC would be: 

i)  Approval of the following: 

a)  Scheme Guidelines; 

b)  PIPs being submitted by States after due approvals from SLAC; 

c)  Empanelment of Expert Institutions; 

d)  Approval of all proposals with project size above Rs.10 lakh; 

e)  PIP for capacity building and research; 

ii) Review of the following: 

a) PIP implementation; 

b) Various studies; 

c)  Capacity Building activities of MoFPI and State agencies; 

d) Trainings  on  skills  and  EDP  imparted  to  enterprises  and  groups-  broad 

review of timely trainings as per Training committee feedback; 

e) Activities being undertaken for strengthening of State institutions; 

f)  Timely  subsidy  disbursal  for  micro  enterprises  and  groups  with  Nodal 

Banks. 

iii) Apart  from  the  above  approval  and  review  activities,  the  IMEC  would  also 

undertake the following activities 

a) Review and set quarterly targets; 

b) Monitor inter-ministerial co-operation and convergence; 

c)  Oversee the overall scheme progress; 

d) Oversee performance of States; 

e) Any other matter relating to implementation of the Scheme. 

9.2.2  Project Executive Committee: 

9.2.2.1 A Project Executive Committee would be constituted at the operational level in the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries for regular monitoring and implementation 
of the scheme with the following composition: 

Table 2: Composition of PEC 

Additional Secretary, MOFPI 

(i) 
(ii)  Additional/Joint  Secretaries  -  Ministry/Department  of  Commerce, 
Agriculture,  Rural  Development,  Animal  Husbandry  &  Dairying, 
Fisheries, MSME, MSDE, Urban Development & Housing and NITI 
Aayog 

Chairperson 
Members 

18 

 
 

(iii)  AS&FA, Ministry of Food Processing Industries 

Member 

(iv)  Representatives of APEDA, MPEDA, NIFTEM, IIFPT, CFTRI, National 

Members 

Horticulture Board (NHB), FSSAI, NABARD 

(v)  Experts in Food Processing, Banking/Finance and Marketing 
(vi)  Nominees of the Partner Institutions TRIFED, NCDC, NSCFDC and 

Members 
Members 
