SFAC 

9.2.2.2  The  Executive  Committee  would  meet  once  every  month  and  will  have  the 

following functions: 

i)  Approval of the following: 

a)  Examination of all the proposals submitted to IMEC for approval including 
PIPs of States, National institutions, State Level Technical Institutions and 
projects for approval above Rs 10 lakh proposed by the States; 

b)  Setting up of NPMU. 

c)  Approve projects under the scheme for items to be spent by Government of 

India and those with 100% central share up to a limit of Rs 10 lakh; 

d)  Release  of  60%  of  the  matching  grant  as  GOI  share  to  the  individual 

beneficiaries; 

e) 

IEC proposals 

f)  MIS related decisions; 

ii)  Review of the following: 

a)  Timely subsidy disbursal for micro enterprises and groups with Nodal Banks 

and escalation to IMEC in case of need; 

iii)  Apart  from  the  above  approval  and  review  activities,  the  PEC  would  also 

undertake the following activities: 

a)  Set monthly targets for the scheme in line with the annual targets being set 

by the IMEC; 

b)  Monitor the progress of the scheme through the portal and through effective 

dashboard monitoring; 

c) 

Inter Ministries cooperation. 

9.2.3  Committee on Capacity Building & Research: 

9.2.3.1  There would be a Committee for Capacity Building and Research at the national 
level  to  oversee  the  training  and  research  aspects.  This  Committee  would  be 
chaired by a prominent industry expert. The Committee would have following the 
members:- 

19 

 
 

Table 3-Composition of Training Committee at MoFPI 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi)  Representatives  of  CFTRI/DFRL/relevant 

Chairperson 
Industry Expert 
Member 
Vice Chancellor, NIFTEM / Director, IIFPT 
Member 
JS, MOFPI dealing with skill training 
JS, MSDE 
Member 
Representative of Food Sector Skill Council  Member 
Member 

ICAR institutes. 

(vii)  Representative of M/o Rural Development 
(viii)  Experts 

Banking/Finance 

in 

Member 
Members 

Marketing/Branding  
Programme Director, MoFPI. 

as 

nominated 

and 
  by 

9.2.3.2  The  Committee  on  Capacity  Building  &  Research  would  have  the  following 

functions: 

1. Approval of the following: 

i)  Guidance for the carrying out capacity building & research activities under 

the Scheme. 

ii)  Proposals  of  Capacity  Building  activities  of  MoFPI,  State  and  District 

agencies for further financial approvals from PEC/IMEC 

iii)  Calendars  and  syllabus  for  training  being  given  by  National  and  State 

Agencies for enterprises and groups 

iv)  Curriculum for handholding support modules for FUPs and DPRs for the 

enterprises. 

2. Review of the following: 

i)  Trainings being provided as per approved training calendars by National, 

State agencies and District Resource persons. 

9.2.4  National Programme Management Unit (NPMU): There would be a PMU housed 
at  the  National  level  comprising  professionals  engaged  on  contract  basis.  The 
PMU would provide all support to the Programme Division of MoFPI for carrying all 
the  functions  listed  above.  The  specific  functions  of  the  NPMU  will  include  the 
following: 

i)  Prepare  necessary  templates,  closely  coordinate  with,  mentor  and  monitor 

State PMUs and SNAs, for timely completion of studies and PIPs; 

ii)  Capacity building activities of MoFPI, State and District Agencies and placing 

the proposals for due approvals of the training committee and PEC; 

20 

 
 
 

iii)  Development  of  the  National  Portal  and  MIS  and  ensuring  timely  flow  of 

information in the Portal; 

iv)  Trainings being provided as per approved training calendars by National, State 
agencies  and  District  Resource  persons  for  further  review  by  Training 
Committee; 

v)  Strengthening of National and State Level Technical Institutions; 

vi)  Timely disbursal of subsidies to enterprises through the National Portal; 

vii)  Appraisal of DPRs submitted by the States and other agencies to MOFPI for 

approval; 

viii) Timely provision of seed capital support to groups; 

ix)  Timely submissions of Branding and Marketing plans from SNA; 

x)  Timely setting up of the SPMUs and District Resource Persons. 

9.2.5  Nodal  Bank:  MoFPI  would  select  a  Nodal  Bank  for  facilitation  and  ensuring 
smooth flow of subsidies from the Banks to the micro enterprises. The functions of 
the Nodal bank would include the following: 

i)  Monitoring and Liaising with Banks for target driven approvals of applications 
and timely disbursal of subsidies to individual micro enterprises and groups; 

ii)  Transfer  of  subsidy  from  the  central  and  state  governments  to  the  bank 

accounts of beneficiary in the lending bank branch. 

9.3 

State Level Structures 

9.3.1  At  the  State  level,  a  State  Level  Approval  Committee  would  oversee  the 
implementation of the scheme and the scheme would be operated by a nominated 
State Nodal Agency, supported by a State PMU. The details are given below. 

9.3.2  State level Approval Committee: 

9.3.2.1  The State Level Approval Committee would be chaired by the Chief Secretary or 

his nominee and would have the following composition: 

Table 4: SLAC Composition 

Chief Secretary 
Finance Secretary 

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  ACS/Pr  Secretary/Secretaries  of  Food  Processing, 
Industries,  MSME,  Fisheries,  Animal 

Agriculture, 
Husbandry, Skill Development 

(iv)  Mission Director, SRLM 

(v) 

Representative of State Level Technical Institution 

21 

Chairperson 
Member 
Members 

Member 

Member 

 
 
 

(vi) 

Institutions – Representatives from key State Technical 
Institutions. 

Members 

(vii)  Representatives of NABARD, NSDC, SLBC,  NCDC 
(viii)  Experts in Banking/Finance and Marketing/Branding as 

Member 
Member 

nominated by the State Government 

(ix)  State Nodal Officer 

Member 
Secretary 

9.3.2.2  The State Government may nominate any other member to SLAC or DLC. 

9.3.2.3  The  State  Level  Approval  Committee  would  be  responsible  for  approval  of  the 

following: 

i)  Surveys/Studies; 

ii)  PIP submitted by SNA; 

iii)  Capacity building activities of State and District officials; 

iv)  Training  and  skill  development  calendars 

for  State 

level  agencies, 

enterprises; 

v)  Strengthening of State institutions; 

vi)  Subsidy proposals for groups for recommending to MOFPI; 

vii)  Proposals  for  provision  of  Common  Facilities,  groups  and  marketing  & 

branding; 

viii) Seed Capital to groups; 

ix)  The SLAC will have power to sanction project expenditure up to Rs. 10 lakh 

on various activities included in the PIP; 

9.3.2.4  Apart  from  the  above  approvals,  the  SLAC  would  also  undertake  the  following 

activities 

i)  Set monthly targets for the scheme in line with the overall scheme targets. 

ii)  Monitor the progress of the scheme through the portal. 

iii) Ensure synergy with other relevant organizations. 

iv) Ensure inspection of Units/ CFC funded under the scheme. 

9.3.3  State  Nodal  Department:  Each  State  Government  should  appoint  a  Nodal 
Department at the Governmental level and a State Nodal Officer to oversee the 
implementation of the Scheme. The selection of the Nodal Department should be 
undertaken  keeping  in  view  the  relative  strength  and  experience  of  various 
departments in the State involved in the food processing sector at micro & cluster 
levels. The State Nodal Officer should be of the rank Secretary or Director/HOD. 
The potential nodal departments could be Agriculture or Horticulture  Department, 

22 

 
 

Food Processing Department, Industries Department, MSME Department or Rural 
Development Department. 

9.3.4  State Nodal Agency: Each State should appoint a State Nodal Agency. The State 
Nodal Agency (SNA) could be a Directorate or a Mission or an entity of the State 
Government.  The  SNA  would  be  the  operational  agency  at  the  State  level  for 
implementing the Scheme. Role and Responsibilities of the SNA shall include: 

i)  Conducting various studies; 

ii)  Getting PIP prepared; 

iii)  Monitoring  the  training  and  capacity  building  activities  undertaken  by  State 

Level Technical Institute and District Resource Persons; 

iv)  Carrying out strengthening of State Level Technical Institution; 

v)  Ensuring timely submission of Subsidy proposals by District Committees; 

vi)  Ensuring timely submission of plans for provision of Common Facilities; 

vii)  Ensuring timely submission of Seed Capital proposals of groups; 

viii) Developing Branding and Marketing proposals; 

ix)  Monitoring the handholding support being given by District Resource Persons 

to enterprises for DPRs; 

x)  Setting up of SPMU; 

xi)  Monitoring and approvals for hiring of District Resource Persons; 

xii)  Furnishing  Utilization  Certificates  (UCs)  and  regular  Progress  Reports  to 

MoFPI in the prescribed formats; 
