xiii) IEC; 

xiv) Sharing of best practices. 

9.3.5  State Project Management Unit (SPMU): The State Nodal Agency (SNA) should 
appoint a State Project Management Unit (SPMU). The SPMU could be appointed 
by recruiting the staff on contract basis or on deputation or own staff of SNA. The 
SPMU staff should be engaged on full-time basis for the work of the Scheme. SNA 
may  decide  to  appoint  a  private  agency  also  as  a  SPMU  through  competitive 
bidding process. 

9.3.6  SNA would be provided 2% of the Scheme expenses as administrative expenses. 
The expenses of the SPMU would be borne by the SNA from 2% for administrative 
cost allowed under the Scheme. Details of staff of SPMU along with qualification 
would be as prescribed. 

9.3.6.1 SPMU would have the key responsibility of supporting the SNA in all the functions 

as indicated in para 9.3.4. 

23 

 

9.3.7  District Level Structures 

9.3.7.1  District Level Committee: At the district level, a District Level Committee (DLC) 
would be constituted under the Chairmanship of District Collector. The Committee 
would  have  representation  from  panchayats,  banks,  subject  experts,  academia, 
community  institutions,  FPOs/SHGs,  etc.  The  District  Collector  may  co-opt  any 
other person as a member of DLC. The composition of the District Level Committee 
would be : 

Table 5: Composition of DLC 

(i) 
(ii) 

District Collector 
GM, DIC, District Agriculture Officer, District 
Horticulture Officer 

(iii)  Sarpanch of one GP 
(iv)  One Block Development Officer 
(v)  District Lead Bank Manager 
(vi)  SHG/FPO representatives 
(vii)  Representative of NABARD 
(viii)  District representative of SRLM 
(viii)  Any other persons nominated by Collector 

Chairperson 
Member 

Member 
Member 
Member 
Members 
Member 
Member 
Member 

9.3.7.2  The DLC would be responsible for the following: 

i)  Approvals of applications for loan and subsidy to individual micro enterprises; 

ii)  Recommend applications for common infrastructures & groups to SNA; 

iii)  Monitor  handholding  support  being  rendered  to  micro  enterprises  by  District 

Resource Persons; 

iv)  Monitor the progress of the Scheme through the portal and through effective 

dashboard monitoring; 

v)  Ensure synergy with all relevant Institutions. 

9.3.8  Resources Persons 

9.3.8.1  At the district/regional level, Resources Persons should be appointed by SNA for 

providing handholding support to the beneficiaries. 

9.3.8.2  RPs should have the following qualifications: 

i)  Diploma/degree  in  Food  Technology/  Food  Engineering  from  reputed 

National/ International University/Institute 

ii)  3-5 years’ experience in providing consultancy services to food processing 
industries  for  technology  upgradation,  new  product  development,  quality 
assurance, food safety management; 

24 

 
 
 

iii)  If  persons  qualified  in  food  technology  are  not  available,  persons  with 
experience  in  food  processing  industry,  banking,  DPR  preparation  and 
training may be engaged. 

9.3.8.3  Handholding support should be provided by the Resource Persons to individual 
units and groups for preparation of DPR, taking bank loan, support for obtaining 
necessary  registration  and  licences  including  food  standards  of  FSSAI,  Udyog 
Aadhar, GST etc. 

9.3.8.4 Payment to the Resource Persons would be made on the basis of each beneficiary 
supported by them after sanction of loan to  them by the bank. Payment to each 
Resources Person would be @ Rs.20,000/- per bank loan sanctioned. 50% of the 
payment would be made after sanction of bank loan and remaining 50% after the 
Units  takes  GST  &Udyog  Aadhar  registration,  takes  standard  compliance  of 
FSSAI. Implement the project and is given training. 

9.3.9  State  Nodal  Department  should  decide  on  the  flow&  approval  process  of 
applications  and  support  under  the  Scheme. They  should decide  the respective 
roles of DLC, SNA & State Level Technical Institutions for the following:- 

(i)  Approval level for shortlisting of individual application; 

(ii)  Flow of application of groups & common infrastructure within the state level; 

(iii)  Training  &  capacity  building  activities  and  decision  making  between  DLC, 

SNA & State Level Technical Institutions; 

(iv)  This decision on the flow of applications & process for support within the state 
would  apply  irrespective  of  the  roles  of  the  agencies  specified  in  the 
Guidelines. 

9.3.10  Partner Institutions for Convergence 

9.3.10.1  The scheme lays special focus on SC/ST, women and aspirational districts and 
FPOs, SHGs and producer cooperatives. The following organisations have been 
working in these areas: 

a) TRIFED; 

b) National SC Development Finance Corporation; 

c) National Cooperative Development Cooperation; 

d) Small Farmer Agri-Business Consortium; 

e) National Rural Livelihood Mission under M/o Rural Development. 

9.3.10.2  The above institutions may converge their activities by facilitating identification 
of units / clusters of STs, SCs, cooperatives, FPOs and SHGs respectively. They 
should support preparation of DPRs and proposals for funding and development 
of such institutions under the Scheme and feed such proposals to the State PIPs. 
They should also provide handholding support to such supported units and work 

25 

 

with the States in this endeavor. Each of the Partner Institutions would be member 
of the PEC. 
