10.0  Studies & Reports 

10.1  State Level Upgradation Plan (SLUP): The SNA should conduct a State Level 

Upgradation Plan (SLUP) which will have the following two components: 

10.1.1 Base-Line Assessments: The baseline study should focus on identifying ODOP. 
This study  should get  concluded  by  31  July, 2020  in  each  State. For  this  study, 
Rs.2.5 – 10.0 lakh would be provided to the States. 

10.1.2 State  Level  Upgradation  Plan:  Once  decision  is taken  on  the  ODOP,  detailed 
study should be carried out in the States detailing the number of units undertaking 
processing of that product in the district, farm level of operations, total volume and 
value of produce, technology, farm gate level processing, storage, warehousing, 
number of processing units, their details, etc. This study should be conducted by 
31 December, 2020. The amount provided for the above study would be Rs.10.0 
–  75.0  lakh  to  the  States.  The  Terms  of  Reference  (TOR)  of  the  above  studies 
would be as prescribed. 

10.2  Study  of  FPOs/Producer  Cooperatives/  SHGs:  In  parallel to  the above  study, 
SNAs in coordination with NCDC, SFAC, TRIFED, NSCFDC and SRLMs should 
collect data on the level of operation of SHGs, producer cooperatives, FPOs in the 
states. 

10.3  Once  the  infrastructure  and  other  facilities  as  envisaged  in  the  State  Level 
Upgradation Plan have been carried out, another study should be carried out for 
further  course  of  action  for  ODOP  in  such  districts.  For  any  other  studies  to  be 
conducted by the SNA, they should include the proposal for the study in Project 
Implementation Plan and send it for approval to MoFPI along with cost estimates. 

11.0  Project Implementation Plan (PIP) 

11.1  Each  State  should  prepare  a  PIP  for  the  year  in  the  month  of  January  of  the 
previous year and send it to MoFPI for approval by 31st January of that year. The 
PIP  should  be  placed  before  the  Inter  Ministerial  Empowered  Committee  for 
approval.  The  State  Level  Approval  Committee  should  recommend  the  PIP  to 
MoFPI. MoFPI should approve the PIP by 31st March of the previous Financial year. 
In the year 2020-21, PIPs should be sent by the States to MoFPI for approval by 
30th September 2020. 

11.2  The PIP should contain the following details:- 

i) 

Implementation  arrangements  for  programme  in  the  State  including  the 
agencies assigned, institutions selected etc; 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii)  State Nodal Agency details along with officers assigned; 

iii)  Composition of SLAC/DLC; 

iv)  Details and plans for setting up of SPMU and manpower; 

v)  Details and plans for hiring of District Resource Persons; 

vi)  Details of State Level Technical Institution; 

vii)  Activities planned for the year as aligned with the scheme guidelines; 

a)  Details of studies planned and timelines for completion; 

b)  Details of trainings planned for the year with clear role matrix for the different 

institutions; 

c)  Broad  targets  for  subsidy  disbursement  and number  of  enterprises  booth 

groups and individuals; 

d)  Broad list of clusters district wise; 

e)  Listing  of  SHGs/FPOs/Cooperatives  in  the  State,  identified  as  potential 

stakeholders in the programme; 

f)  Abstract of Branding and Marketing plans for the products. 

viii) Detailed cost estimates and budgets for all the activities for the year; 

ix)  Detailed flow chart of implementing the activities planned; 

x)  Stakeholder  matrix  with  clear  roles  and  responsibilities  earmarked  for  each 

person. 

11.3  PIP is a planning & budgeting exercise. After the approval of PIP, States should 
go ahead for incurring expenditure for the items subject to the delegation of powers 
given to the States. 

11.4  State  Level  Approval  Committee  is  empowered  to  sanction  expenditure  for 
individual items up to Rs.10 lakh and any proposal for expenditure above Rs.10 
lakh should be sent to MoFPI for approval. That would include DPRs for projects 
with grant above Rs 10 lakh, expenditure on State Level Technical Institution that 
exceeds Rs 10 lakh, etc. 

11.5 

In case of NIFTEM and IIFPT, after approval of their PIP, the existing delegation 
of powers within the organization should be used for incurring expenditure up to 
Rs.10 lakh. Any proposal for incurring any expenditure above Rs.10 lakh should 
be sent to MoFPI for approval, as a specific proposal. 

12.0  Disbursement of Funds 
