12.1  The  scheme  is  a  centrally  sponsored  scheme  with  the  following  sharing  of 

resources between the Centre and the States: 

27 

 
 
 

i)  Centre-State share at 60:40; 

ii)  90:10 sharing between center and Himalayan and North Eastern States; 

iii)  UTs  with  legislature  sharing  would  be  60:40  between  the  Centre  and  the 

States; 

iv)  UTs  without  legislature  100%  funds  would  be  provided  by  the  Central 

Government. 

12.2 The following components would be met 100% by the Central Government: 

i)  Capacity buildings & training; 

ii)  Administrative cost of national PMU for MoFPI; 

iii)  Training  support  in  terms  of  audio-visual,  development  of  print  material, 

development of modules etc. at the national level; 

iv)  MIS; 

v)  Development of technologies, products, etc; 

vi)  Support to national level partner institutions; 

vii)  Promotional activities at the national level; 

viii) Any other expenditure made directly by Govt. of India would be borne 100% 

by MOFPI. 

12.3  Expenditure in the first year, whether incurred by the Centre or the States would 
be borne 100% by the Govt. of India. This is being done because the Scheme is 
launched after the State budgets have been approved. Therefore, the States may 
be able to provide funding only after Supplementary Budgets are approved. The 
expenditure  made  in  the  first  year  would  be adjusted  in 60:40 ratio  in  the  funds 
being transferred to the States equally in the next four years. 

12.4  The  funds  would  be  provided  to  the  States  based  on  the  approved  PIP  in  two 
installments  in  a  year  after  Utilization  Certificate  (UC)  for  the  installments  other 
than the immediate previous release, have been given. There would  be no such 
requirement of UC for the funds transferred in the year 2020-21. 

12.5  To meet administrative expenditure for PMUs, studies & training, grant of would be 
provided to the States in the second/third quarter of 2020-21. Subsequently, after 
the approval of PIP, funds would be provided for the full year 2020-21 to the States 
in a single installment. 

12.7  Allocation  for  Scheduled  Caste  (SC)/  Scheduled  Tribe  (ST)/  North  Eastern 

Region (NER) 

12.7.1 Specific allocations for SC/ST and NER would be made in the budget allocations 
under  the  Scheme.  These  funds  would  be  allocated  to  the  States  based  on 
population of SC/ST in the States. Such SC/ST allocations could only be utilized 

28 

 

for  giving  benefits  under  the  Scheme  to  the  units  owned  by  SC/ST  persons 
respectively. In case of Groups, such funds could be utilized only if more than 50% 
of  the  members  of  such  groups  belong  to  SC/ST  community.  In  case  of  North 
Eastern States, allocations would be made under the Scheme to comply with the 
norms of using such funds in such States. 

13.0  Credit Linkage 

13.1  The main expenditure under the Scheme is credit linked grant @35% for the for 
micro  food  processing  enterprises  subject  to  a  maximum  of  Rs.10  lakh. 
Additionally,  credit  linked  grant  is  being  provided  to  groups  @35%  for  capital 
investment,  credit  linked  grant  for  common  infrastructure  @  35%.  These  grants 
would be transferred to the lending bank after sanction of the loan by the bank. 

13.2  At the national level, a Nodal bank would be appointed for disbursement of subsidy 

to the banks and liaison with the banks. 

13.3  The  bank  sanctioning  the  loan  would  open  a  mirror  account  in  the  name  of  the 
beneficiary. The lending bank would report the fact of sanction of loan to the Nodal 
Bank  at  the  national  level.  After  receipt  of  this  information,  Central  and  State 
Government should respectively transfer 60% and 40% of its share of grant to the 
Nodal Bank. The Nodal Bank would transfer 60% of the Central share of the grant 
and 40% of the State share of the grant together to the concerned lending Bank 
branch. That Bank branch should place this amount in the mirror-bank account of 
the  beneficiary.  The  lending  bank  should  disburse  sanction  loan  amount  in 
accordance with normal banking practice to the beneficiary/supplier. 

13.4 

If after a period of three years from the disbursement of last tranche of the loan, 
the  beneficiary  account  is  still  standard,  and  the  unit  is  operational,  this  grant 
amount would be adjusted in the bank account of the beneficiary. If the account 
becomes NPA prior to three years from the date of disbursement of the loan, the 
grant  amount  would  be  adjusted  by  the  Bank  towards  repayment  by  the 
beneficiary.  If  the  grant  amount  is  adjusted  after  three  years  against  the  loan 
amount in case of standard account, no interest would be payable by the borrower 
on the portion of the loan disbursed by the Bank equal to the grant amount from 
the date of receipt of the grant amount by the lending bank. 
