13.5  Benefit of credit guarantee coverage for loans offered under this Scheme should 
be provided to the borrower under the Credit Guarantee Trust for Micro & Small 
Enterprises through the National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company under their 
usual terms & conditions. Interest subvention of 2% under the Interest Subvention 
Scheme  for  incremental  credit  to  MSMEs  2018  would  also  be  available  to  the 
borrowers on the outstanding balance. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 

13.6 

It should be ensured by the SNA that the applications are forwarded to the banks 
on a regular basis rather than forwarding a bunch of them together on a monthly 
or quarterly basis. 

13.7  The proposals should be forwarded to the bank branches along with basic KYC of 
the applicant. To minimize the processing time, applications should be forwarded 
to the banks along with all the requisite documents required for loan applications 
such  as  lease/ownership  documents  of  land  for  setting  up  the  unit/machinery, 
registration and necessary Government clearances, etc. Applications should carry 
complete project details and the DPR should be commensurate with the economic 
viability  of  the  locality.  Project  cost  should  be  a  realistic  figure  based  on  a 
reasonable assessment of the economic viability of the project. 

14.0  MIS 

14.1  The  Scheme  would  to  be monitored and the entire  flow of data  and  approval of 
proposals, etc. would take place on an online system. An MIS would be developed 
by  MoFPI  for  this  purpose.  The  following  information  flow/approvals  would  take 
place on MIS: 

i)  Proposals for PIP sent by the States and their approval including any changes 

by MoFPI; 

ii)  Proposal of PIP by national level training institutions of their approval including 

any changes; 

iii)  Application 
enterprises; 

for 

loans  submitted  by 

individual  micro 

food  processing 

iv)  Uploading of DPRs and details of handholding support provided; 

v)  Details of training support provided to individual Units; 

vi)  Forwarding of loan proposals to the banks; 

vii)  Uploading of details of sanction of loan by the banks; 

viii) Any  payment  made  to  any  person  or  agency  including  groups  and 

maintenance of accounts; 

ix)  Any  support  provided  in  terms  of  training,  hand  holding  to  groups  and 

individuals; 

x)  A  ledger  should  be  there  for  each  individual  and  group  selected  under  the 
Scheme. This ledger should provide details of all the support to the individual 
and group, details their economic activities, disbursement of loans etc; 

30 

 
 
 
 
 

xi)  All payments made by SNA/ MoFPI under the Scheme to any entity should be 
entered  into  MIS.  All  activities  undertaken  under  the  Scheme  should  be 
entered into the MIS; 

xii)  MIS  would  be  developed  by  MoFPI.  All  expenditure  for  development, 
maintenance and monitoring would be met by MoFPI under the Scheme. 

15.0  Empanelment of Expert Institutions 

15.1  A large number of institutions, both in Government and private exist with expertise 
in  marketing,  research,  product  development,  packaging,  branding,  training, 
handholding  support,  etc.  For  each  of  these  activities,  MoFPI  would  empanel 
institutions at the National level, whose services could be utilized by the States. 
The empanelment would be carried out by a transparent process for evaluation of 
expertise in the field. Award of work to these empaneled institutions by the States 
should be done after inviting financial proposals for the task involved by them. 

16.0  Convergence Framework 

16.1  Food Processing Enterprises being supported under the Scheme would be eligible 

for benefits under the following Government Schemes: 

i)  National  Rural  Livelihood  Mission  –  providing  seed  capital, 

training, 

handholding support and interest subvention to SHGs; 

ii)  Start-up  Village  Entrepreneurship  Programme  (SVEP)  –It  is  a  Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme, a part of NRLM, provides capital and technical support to 
rural start-ups through training, handholding and support through Community 
Enterprises Fund (CEF) as a loan up to Rs.1 lakh for individual entrepreneur 
and Rs.5 lakh for group entrepreneurs at 12% interest; 

iii)  Interest  Subvention  Scheme  for  incremental  credit  to  MSMEs  2018  –  2% 

interest subvention on outstanding balance; 

iv)  Credit  Guarantee  Trust  Fund  for  Micro  &  Small  Enterprises  (CGTMSE)  for 

collateral free loan up to Rs 2 crore; 

v)  PM MUDRA Yojana for loan up to Rs.10 lakh; 

vi)  A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Industry and  Entrepreneurship 

(ASPIRE); 

vii)  Scheme for Fund for Regeneration of Rural Industry (SFURTI); 

viii) Public Procurement Policy for MSEs; 

ix)  Benefits available under various other Schemes of MoFPI such as Backward 
& Forward Linkages, Agricultural Production Cluster, Cold Chain etc. would be 
used to provide support to clusters/groups. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 

x)  Support from PMKVY and NRLM for skill training for SHGs, if falling within the 
guidelines would be taken. For shorter duration on site trainings, support would 
be  provided  from  NRLM  and  the  PM  FME  scheme,  tailor-made  for  such 
purposes. 

32 

 


